---
title: "Arcfest 2"
date: 2024-08-03
tags: game_dev retrospective projects music art code
category: "retrospective"

description: "behind the scenes on spaceship combat game"
toc: true
date_edited: 2024-08-03
---

<!-- table of contents hack -->
<h2 style="color:transparent; font-size:1px; margin:0; padding 0;">(top of post)</h2>

Arcfest was a side project I worked on in high school. It was a top-down
fighting game where you fought against another person to knock them out of a shrinking safe zone. It was pretty fast-paced -- a single round typically lasting less than thirty seconds, and a full match hovering around three to five minutes.

I thought the concept was pretty cool -- an interesting spin on a fighting game, though it was more of a tech demo then a full game. It was developed over a period of two weeks whenever I had time in the evenings. I probably could've worked on it longer, but I was working on another game at the time, so I felt like my brain would've fried if I worked on two separate projects at the same time.

I had always wanted to make a sequel to it -- with a little more time and love poured into it.

So I did!

The game is playable on the web, so if you haven't tried it out, you can check it out [here](https://johnrcd.itch.io/arcfest-2):

> https://johnrcd.itch.io/arcfest-2

Alternatively, you can download a Windows build. The performance is notably better, if that's an issue with the itch build.

## godot? nope.

The original intention for Arcfest II was to have it be developed on the Godot game engine. Around the start of the year (2024), Unity got a ton of flak for creating a "pay-per-install" system for games built with the engine. The change didn't affect me directly (and they did rollback some of their plans), but there was a movement to phase out the Unity engine for game development and look into other alternatives -- predominantly, Godot and Unreal.

I'm pretty attached to Unity (big fan of C#), but I figured given the type of games I'd like to make -- 2D games, normally with a retro-like feel -- it makes sense to learn an engine that caters to that type of game development.[^godot_or_unreal]

Long story short -- that didn't work out.

I tend to dive headfirst into new tech and stuff before actually taking the time to properly learn it. I gave myself half (not even full!) of an introduction to Godot video guide before deciding that I could make a game with that knowledge.

Turns out, if you try to make stuff with an engine you have zero practical experience on, you don't get much done.

I realized that the part of me that wanted to create a game with a vision I had mapped out clashed directly with the part of me that wanted to take this project as a learning experience, so I gave up on Godot, and switched back to Unity.

I probably will learn Godot properly at some point, and transition better, but maybe after a few more tutorials.

[^godot_or_unreal]: Unreal was the other popular engine on the table, but I didn't want to learn that for two reasons: I don't know C++ (and Blueprints seems kinda meh), and it's tailored for Triple A game development. I want to work on cute/fun 2D (probably pixel art) games, so it didn't look that cool.

## development

My main goal for development was to keep the same, fun gameplay from the original but adding a bunch of polish to everything -- better art, sound, music -- basically, I wanted the presentation to be better.

I also wanted the code to be a lot better, but there was a three year gap between the development of the first and second game -- I'd be a lot more worried if my code wasn't already better by default.

### pick your own ships!

In the game, you choose from a selection of four spaceships before the match begins. It was mostly done on a whim since I made four spaceship sprites instead of two, but it ended up being a benefit for me, since it gave me an oppertunity to work on a problem I hadn't encountered before:

Character customization!

Okay -- It's not *really* character customization, you literally choose a ship and nothing else -- but the point is that the I had to dynamically generate the spaceships based on what you chose in the match selection screen. The actual work wasn't too difficult, but there were definitely more problems to solve, and a decent amount of time spent wondering which solutions were going to annoy me the least.

There's no perfect solution, but I'm pretty happy with my system so far:

- There is a "SpaceshipBase" object that includes all the logic that every spaceship will have.
- Stored in the game directory are "SpaceshipData" files that house the data for individual ships.
- For every new ship, the data regarding the ship a player wants to use is provided (SpaceshipData). The Spaceship then processes the data, updating itself based on the new changes (adding ship sprite, updating movement stats).
- Lastly, a ConfigurePlayer function is called with the player ID of the player who'll be using the spaceship, which will allow the player to control the spaceship.

There's probably a better solution out there, but I think it isn't bad, all things considered. At the very least, I have stuff spread out if I ever want to expand on anything.

(non-playable ships...?)

### music

The original game effectively only had one music track -- a fighting track that plays during the actual match.[^arcfest_two_tracks] It had a bit of a manic, goofy vibe -- something you'd hear on a retro console like the NES, or something. For this game, I wanted to go for something a bit cooler, more intense -- stressful, maybe.

[^arcfest_two_tracks]: Technically, Arcfest had two music tracks (not just one) -- the results music, but you couldn't even hear all of it even if you wanted too. Also, if you only checked out the game through the gameplay trailer, you wouldn't even hear it, because I didn't have the song added into the game yet -- I just slapped on the beginning of Glide by Stephen Walking.

#### Track 01: Technobabble (Main Menu)

Technically, Technobabble is the only song I made *for* the game. The other two tracks happened to be created beforehand. I just used them because they sounded good.

The main goal for this track was just to build hype and energy when a player first loaded the game. I had been a part of a game jam earlier[^bee_game] in the year, and while the game itself was relatively light-hearted (a game about a bee), I ended up making the music pop off, with overdriven guitars and a rock organ that blasted as soon as the game loaded.

It was kind of absurd, but I figured the same idea of immediately building hype would work better for Arcfest -- just, less guitar and more synth.

[^bee_game]: The game is called [*Beelieve I Can Fly*](https://johnrcd.itch.io/beelieve). You play as an ant that wants to fly, and attempts to do so by whacking bees into the ground to propel themselves upwards.

#### Track 02: Infiltration (Gameplay)

This track was one I developed from a small project focused on creating cool 3D movement, similar to Mirrors Edge, but more gamified and less realistic.

The game never came to light (I am lazy), but the whole idea was to play as a guy put into suicide missions and somehow always make it out. This track specifically was about an infiltration gone wrong, and going up floor by floor in a skyscraper to escape.

#### Track 03: Resolution (Match Results)

I wanted to make a song that had a lot of fast notes, because it's ear candy.

That's about it.

### i hate missles

I'm dedicated a whole section to the missles because they caused me a lot of grief for completely avoidable reasons.

For around a full week, most of my effort was spent trying to fix the homing missles. There were a bunch of small things that I had to figure out or consider.

Just for fun, I'll organize it as a bunch of bullet points representing my (roughly chronological) thoughts:

#### part 1: standard coding stuff

- Each spaceship has it's own light trail -- it makes sense that the missles should have them too.
    - Arcfest I had different light trail colours for the missles, so we should make the colours separate.
- Wait, where do we store these colours?
    - The spaceship metadata should probably include colours.
    - Wait, it's not just colours -- it's whole Gradients.
- why do the missles only fire upwards
    - I'm going to ignore this for now
- How am I supposed to have the missle trail colours change?
    - (insert two hours of brainrot)
    - Okay so the root Spaceship component tells the MissleAttack component that it received Spaceship metadata and it can have it, which then sends a message to a missle everytime it creates one that "hey you need to use this trail colour" which then needs to be passed directly to the trail component

#### part 2: descent into madness

- ok I should fix the missle movement for real
    - (looks at Brackeys tutorial) what is a cross product
    - wait why are we using 3D math for a 2D moving missle??
    - screw this i'm using a different movement system for the missles
- missles should be good
    - tl;dr: they were not
    - okay why are the missles doing complete 180 turns that's not how missles work
    - what if i just set their speed to a constant value
    - why are they moving AWAY FROM ME
        - authors note: i had the missles target the shooter directly because i hadn't implemented player spawning yet
- (1 day of being terrible of math)
- where is the original code for Arcfest
    - oh nice it's on github
    - it doesn't have the missle code because i switched to Unity Collab oh
    - unity collab is deprecated
    - screw it i'm going back to brackeys code
- back to square 1 -- missles always shoot straight up before doing the homing thing
    - i hate everything

#### part 3: salvation

- I should probably watch the tutorial instead of copy pasting the code.
- (figures it out)

Normally I like to code stuff myself because it's more fun and I have a better understanding of what I'm doing, but occasionally I don't do that and severely regret it.

## game jargon

One thing I think is fun about competitive games is the jargon that the community develops overtime. The one that stands out to me is Overwatch (the main game I've been playing recently), where a lot of official terms are scrapped for more direct/implicitive word choice -- Baby D.Va instead of Pilot D.Va, Sigma's Suck instead of his Kinetic Grasp, Lucio's Beat instead of his Sound Barrier, and so on.

Arcfest does not have a competitive community whatsoever (or really any community), but when my friends were playtesting the game, they noticed that spaceships dashing into eachother cause significantly higher knockback for both parties than if only one person hit with their dash. Since they're big fans of Jujutsu Kaisen, they called it a domain clash.

It's a small thing, but I thought it was cool.

## retrospective and future plans

I'll probably continue to work on Arcfest on-and-off inbetween projects and random life events.

The game was produced for Winnipeg Slow Jam 2024, but now that that has finished, I can expand my plans a bit more beyond simply improving the experience of the original game.

Some things I have in mind:

- New playable spaceships!
- Ability to choose a weapon before a match.
- Different maps to play on.
- Release the game soundtrack on Bandcamp + Spotify + (insert music streaming services here)
- Three player combat?
- Four player combat???

<hr />

## footnotes
