---
title: What's RSS?
---
RSS is a system where you can view content from websites in a centralized source, rather than having to view each site individually.

## Why?

It's nice to have everything in one spot, basically.

People post stuff online. There are a lot of places where people do this— a lot of places you have to individually check to look for new content:

*   Your YouTube feed
    
*   A specific YouTube channel
    
*   Recent news articles
    
*   Latest blog post
    
*   etc.
    

You can streamline how you consume content by creating an RSS feed, filtering out everything but what you've set up to browse.

### How does it work?

Content from a website/group/individual is put into an _RSS Feed_, a text-based file formatted in a way that can be read by an _RSS Reader_, the app that you'll use to see RSS feeds.

An RSS reader accesses an RSS feed via link. For each feed you want to be updated on, you'll need to provide a link to your reader. For example, you can view the latest posts in this blog at [/feed.xml](https://blog.rovidecena.com/feed.xml).

RSS readers do not immediately update whenever new content is available, but instead when they scan your feed links for new content. Most RSS readers allow you to customize how often they scan for new content. In addition, RSS feeds typically only show the latest posts on a website, though the length of time and/or amount of posts they show is dependent on how they configured their RSS feed.

### What if a website doesn't support RSS?

You can still access content from a website that support RSS, but it can be problematic.

If a website doesn't have an RSS feed for you to link, one will have to be generated for you. This can be done through third-party sources that generate feeds, though this often comes at a cost. Some websites may technically support RSS, but only as a deprecated feature that they don't advertise.